This is an interview with retired Army Major
Edward John Carter by John Martin on November 27,
1988, in San Antonio, Texas, concerning the
Vietnam War. In the interest of accumulating
knowledge about the war, I am going to donate this
tape to the Texas A&M Oral History Collection in
the University Archives. Is that all right with
you? Yes, it is. OK. Can you please state your place
and date of birth? I was born in Spokane,
Washington on 26 June 1946. OK.
What is the extent of your education before the
war, and what is it now? Before I entered the
service, I had completed two years of college.
Since my participation in the Vietnam War, I have
graduated from college and am now in pursuit of a
master's degree in business administration.
How and why did you join the Army? I joined the Army
in February of 1967, primarily to beat the draft
because I wanted to fly helicopters. I enlisted
for the Warrant Officer Flight Program. Okay. Can
you give a brief sketch of your military career?
I completed basic training, Army flight
training, and attack helicopter training. Went
to Vietnam for one year. Upon completion of my tour
in Vietnam, I served as an attack helicopter
instructor pilot and was commissioned in armor.
Served several ground command assignments and
staff assignments, aviation staff and
operational assignments. and ended up my career
in installation level staff and finally flag
headquarters staff assignments.
What type of training did you receive before your
tour in Vietnam? Well, I received a standard basic
training, eight-week basic combat training at
Fort Pope, Louisiana, followed by my Army flight
training at Fort Walters. Texas, Fort Rucker,
Alabama, then my attack helicopter training in
Savannah, Georgia prior to going to Vietnam.
When was your tour in Vietnam? This is June 1968,
June 1969. Okay, and what unit were you with? I was
assigned to Air Cavalry Troop, 11th Armored
Cavalry Regiment, located in the III Corps area of
Vietnam, more precisely, Ben Hoa area. Do you
believe the training you received prepare you for
Vietnam? Well, from an operational standpoint
and learning the tactics of helicopter
employment and attack helicopter employment, I
think I was very well prepared. I was certainly
very confident in my ability to operate a
helicopter. When I first got over there, I wasn't
real confident in my ability to conform to tactics
or just what it would be like to be shot at. I think I
was well prepared. I guess about as well as
anybody. Was there anything that you weren't
prepared for Well, I can't think of anything.
Maybe then, other than what would you do if you were
shot down and captured, that was kind of a lax. We
had probably a week of escape and evasion, which
consisted mostly of an overnight exercise where
you had to keep from getting caught. But the
pressure wasn't really
like it would be if you were really trying to get
away from being captured. I don't know, I guess I
always wondered how would I react or what would I do
if I had been shot down and captured.
What was your biggest fear in Vietnam? Well, being
an attack helicopter pilot, probably my biggest
fear was killing some of our own people with my
bullets. several times that
things would be happening. They'd be calling for
the bullets 25 to 50 meters from their position.
And with the inherent inaccuracy of the rockets,
it really scared you to shoot that close to the
friendlies. That was probably my biggest fear.
The next biggest fear was incoming at night. into
our compound. I was trying to sleep.
You know, fear of the unknown. Nothing you can
control that tends to make you somewhat fearful.
When you were flying, was there ever the fear of
being shot down or shot at? Oh, sure.
You're always afraid that something's going to
happen to you, I guess as you spend more time over
there, you tend to lose that fear. You start
concentrating on your task at hand more
than being shot at until you get close to going
home. It was really funny. The closer guys used to
get to going home, the higher they'd start flying
at 100 feet from Mama. 100 feet for baby, 100 feet
for whoever you could think of. It would kind of run
in, I guess, in a cycle. When you first got there,
you were very cautious. As you got through the
first third, midway to two-thirds and
three-quarters of your tour, that caution kind of
started to go away. And then as you got closer to
going home, you'd start to get more cautious
again.
What were your living conditions like? I had it
real good. We lived at our Black Horse Base Camp was
the regimental area. It was well established. It
had been established a couple of years prior to my
arrival with the unit. The area in Benoit that we
used, all of them, we all lived in wooden hoochies
with metal roofs, plenty of sandbags. We slept on
cots with air mattresses and mosquito nets. We had
clean clothes and three hot meals if you weren't
flying through the meal. So we had it real good
compared to the guys in the bush.
What was a typical day in Vietnam, or was there some
kind of routine that you had? Well, not really. a
set routine. The function of my unit was
reconnaissance.
The 11th Armored Cab Regiment had three ground
squadrons, which were comprised of tanks and APCs
and what have you, and one air cab troop, which was
us, and our mission was to go out and scout around
and try and find signs of the enemy, and at that
point allow the direct the ground troops into
searching or what have you, that area. There was
generally two statuses that you could be on. You
would either fly a mission with your OH-6 and what
we called a pink team, just the two of you out in your
little area trying to find trouble or signs of bad
guys. Then the other status would be as a fire team,
two Cobras. on standby, ready to go any time. You
just kind of alternate between those statuses.
Briefings were usually held at 630 in the morning.
And you just took what the day gave you from that
point on. When you were on call as a fire team, you
usually sat for a 24-hour period. You couldn't go
anywhere. You had to stay close to the aircraft.
And that's probably where I put in some of my
longest days, was getting scrambled at 4 o'clock
in the morning and flying pretty much throughout
the whole day. I had a couple 14- and 16-hour days of
actual flight time in that status. The
hunter-killer or pink team concept was very
boring for me. The scout was down snooping around
the area and In the Cobra, you were up above them
just flying in circles. Circles for eight hours a
day was not a lot of fun.
How was your unit employed to fight the war?
Primarily in reconnaissance. Our regimental
commander was George S. Patton III. And when he
assumed command of the regiment, he had paper
mimeographed with the following order placed
above the doorway of every doorway in the
regimental area. It simply stated, standing
order for troopers of the 11th US cavalry. Find the
bastards and pile on. And that's the way we lived.
Do you believe your operations were successful in
fighting the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese
army? Well, I think we were very successful in
finding the bastards and piling on.
But as far as do I think we were winning or were we
losing, I don't think I'll ever really know
because it seemed like you never made any headway.
You were busy in one area. You'd fight them for a
while, You'd go somewhere else, and then you'd end
up back in the same area again six weeks later. And I
just don't really know that we did any good. We did
good, but we killed a lot of them. But it seemed like
there were always some there to replace them. And I
think if the war would have had a more defined
front, you could see moving backwards or
forwards. so you could determine whether or not
you're losing or winning the war. Probably would
have been a little easier for everybody to
understand it, but when the front was outside the
wire, like you say sometimes, inside the wire
doing TAD,
you really don't get a good feeling. You don't get
any feedback as to your success or failure. All you
know is you're out there every day. Was it
frustrating? Very frustrating. Very
frustrating. I think most people like to have that
feedback. Are you doing well or are you not doing
well? You just really didn't get that feedback.
What type of problems were you in? Were there any
drug problems or problems with careers? People
want to boast their careers or fragging? There
really wasn't any drug problems at the beginning
of my year in Vietnam. Maybe a crew chief now or then
would get caught with some marijuana. It started
to get a little worse amongst the blue platoon, the
air rifle platoon, which was the infantry platoon
we had as part of the unit. Near the end of my tour,
probably the last three or four months before I
came home. And I think at that point in time, things
had started to slow down a little bit, and they had
more time on their hands. They weren't out
actively engaged with the bad guys every day, so
there was a little more tendency, I think, to, to go
for drugs for something to do. But early in my tour,
the blue platoon was very, very active. They were
constantly out in the field. So I think they were
probably tended not to use them. As far as the
pilots using drugs, I only know of one that ever
did. He was in the lift platoon, and he was kind of
kind of a weirdo anyway, but he got caught and
court-martialed. As far as careerism, yes.
My commanding officer, West Point graduate. In
fact, Patton was his TAC officer at West Point when
he was a student.
seized this opportunity to move his career up the
ladder. He eventually retired as a general
officer.
And his mannerisms were quite the same as Patton.
If you ever watched the movie Patton, the son was
pretty much the same. Wore the pearl handle,
excuse me, ivory handle, 45. Curls for pimps. And
Bonson was pretty much in the same mold, that type
of person, personality. Never was any fraggings
while I was there, I think. Fraggings didn't
become the end thing until after I left, as far as
Vietnam goes. Were there any other problems that
you can think of
No, as far as just the day-to-day things. Was there
any racism? No, funny, there wasn't. We had black
pilots and white pilots. In the air rifle
platoons, there was blacks, whites, Hispanics.
In fact, my best friend in Vietnam was black. We got
along very well. I think when you get a job to do, and
there's a tough task, the color barriers or racial
barriers start to go away because everybody's
pulling together, aimed at the accomplishment of
that one task. From that standpoint, I don't think
they're
learning. What did you think of the Vietnamese
people and their culture? Well, I thought they
were certainly backward compared to the way I grew
up. I grew up in primarily an agricultural part of
the United States. And I knew how we farmed. And to
watch the way they farmed using antiquated
methods, oxen and water buffalo and what have you,
it just seemed like they weren't smart enough to
keep up with the times. Or maybe they just couldn't
afford it. I don't know. Their farms were so poor.
The country itself was an absolutely beautiful
country. It was too bad it had to be scarred by war.
I never really got to know the people. Some of the
units over there were allowed to have hooch maids,
and people would come and wash their clothes and
clean their hooch. We weren't allowed to have
them. So we had basically no contact with the
Vietnamese people at all, or I didn't.
So I really can't comment. Did the Army ever give
you any type of training on Vietnam or the culture?
The people's culture? No. If they did, it didn't
impress me or I slept through it. I must have slept
through it because it sure didn't. I still don't
remember ever having any training to that type.
Did you have any contact with ARVN? We did some, had
some operations with the Arvin troops. Of course,
we didn't talk to the, I didn't talk to the Arvin
troops. I talked to the advisor. The American
advisor was who I'd talk to on the radio.
I can remember one bad experience with them that I
thought they were a bunch of chickens. In fact,
they were their helicopters came in the area and
there was some some ground fire going on they just
turned around and left they were supposed to
resupply their own soldiers and they just fled the
area they didn't even make their drop and i
remember having to chase them in my aircraft and
actually shoot a burst of minigun across their
nose to make them turn around and go back and land
and drop their bullets and resupply but that was
that was a bad experience the The other few times
that I did work with the Arvin soldiers, they
seemed to do pretty well. They were fighting well,
fighting hard. Just that one incident where they
appeared to be running rather than fighting. What
did you think of your enemy? When you were there, it
was pretty much an MPA at the time, more than BC, or
was it? Both. And very resourceful. I've got to
admire their resourcefulness. They could take
pieces of nothing and make weapons out of them.
Some of the
devices that they used to set off rockets, a GI
wristwatch and a battery, put their rockets on
cross dates. They'd use a homemade gunner's
quadrant to set the launch angle. They'd hook both
wires to the battery, one to the case on the watch,
and the other, they'd drill a small hole through
the crystal at 12 o'clock. They'd set the watch
with the long hand at 5 past the hour. And 55 minutes
later, when the long hand contacted the wire, that
was stuck through the crystal, the rockets would
launch. That gave them almost an hour to get away.
Very ingenious. Very sneaky. I guess where you
couldn't tell the bad guys from the good guys, it
helped them. Guerrilla warfare is very effective
in that way. I guess that was a source of
frustration. Couldn't really tell them who the
bad guys were.
While you were in Vietnam, did you get a lot of
notice about the demonstrations against the war
back home? Did y'all hear about it while you were in
Vietnam? I get some of it now and then. I guess the
flower children were, everybody knew about the
flower children and flower power and all of that.
Personally, I didn't pay much attention to it.
more important things to worry about, namely my
butt.
If you've seen the movie Good Morning Vietnam, the
new censorship, I think, portrayed in the movie
was probably a little overboard of what it really
was. But it wasn't censored that bad. I don't think
it did. Of course, I've got no way of knowing. I was
there and not here. What did you think about the
protesters when you finished your tour and you
were back home? They were kind of angry.
I don't think they really knew. A lot of them knew
what they were protesting about. I think they were
just... like cattle following the leader. Some of
them knew what they were protesting about, but an
awful lot of them didn't. I guess I kind of blamed
the press, the media, for a lot. I don't know. After
I got back from Vietnam and had been there, you see
some of the newscasts. Now, I know it really didn't
happen the way they're portraying it. I think
sometimes they were very negative against our
being there. They would take the opportunity to
distort a story a little bit to maybe keep the
American people upset about it, I guess. So do you
believe the press should have been held back from,
or should have been somewhat censored by the Army
No, I don't think you can do that and have freedom of
the press. I think the press and the media need to be
there, but they need to, I don't know if you can do
that or not, if there is such a thing as having a
neutral view rather than a hawkish or dovish. If
they just wouldn't put their own opinions into it
all the time, I think, if the correspondent
wouldn't strictly write his stories from his
viewpoint. What was your opinion on the draft?
Well, I enlisted to beat the draft. I
think that the value of the draft became more
evident later on in my honorary career when I
commanded a basic training company, right at the
change from a draft to an all-volunteer. I saw just
one example. I saw the average education level of a
class of trainees, a company of trainees, 225
trainees. The average education level go from 14
years to nine years within just a couple cycles. So
I think as a draft, with the draft, you get a better
cross-section of the people in the United States
than you do with an all-volunteer.
Do you have an opinion about those men that decided
to join the National Guard or to go to Canada? Well,
I think that's two separate issues. As far as
joining the National Guard or Reserves, I had the
same opportunity.
I could have. In fact, the day that I heard about the
Warrant Officer Flight Program on the radio, I had
just come from an interview with the Reserves, the
Army Reserves. A friend of mine and I had gone for an
interview, and I heard about the Warrant Officer
Flight Program. He went on and joined the
Reserves, and I came on active duty. He's still in
the Reserves, and I'm retired. There were
Reserves who served in Vietnam and National
Guard. So, yeah, they, you know, Some people
perceived it as an out, something to do to escape
having to go to Vietnam. I had the same opportunity
and didn't take it. But do you have an opinion about
those who went to Canada? Yeah, I have a definite
opinion about those cowardly SOBs. Okay.
They shouldn't let them back in the country. Do
you
believe the U.S. could have won the war? Yes. Yes.
And why? Well, first off, I think the commanders
over there were too hamstrung by the politicians.
I think if... Goals could have been established,
definite goals that were supportable by the
United States government. And if they had just
turned the leadership loose over there to conduct
the war the way they knew how,
perhaps we'd have made a little better showing
over there. I think Congress being what they are, I
think They hamstrung us too much, and I think there
were a lot of lives lost needlessly. It would not
have been lost if we had given it more commitment as
a nation. Do you think that if the U.S. would have
declared war, the nation would have been able to
get behind it more, or do you think it probably
wouldn't have done anything? I guess I might be
contradicting myself. I don't think the American
people wanted to support a war. At that point in
time, it probably would have taken something as
drastic as the bombing of Pearl Harbor only here in
the United States to shake the people loose into
reality. It's
hard to say what it would have taken to get the U.S.
people behind it, totally committed like they
were in World War II.
If you had to do all over again, would you go back to
Vietnam, go back to that time, would you?
Yes. Like I said, 21 years in the Army. That's
really the only, that one year I was doing what I was
trained to do, and that's fight. The rest of the 21
years, I was either training people to be prepared
or trying to be prepared myself. It's easier to
fight the peacetime moment.